To the steadfast, honorable, prudent, respected, and wise mayor and council of the city of Schwäbisch Hall, my gracious commanding dear sirs.

To the steadfast, honorable, prudent, and wise Mayor and Council of the city of Schwebisch Hall, my gracious and esteemed lords.

Esteemed, honorable, prudent, and wise sirs, my entirely willing and diligent service to you, gracious commanding dear sirs, has previously been at your disposal. 

Esteemed, honorable, prudent, and wise E. F. W., my very willing and diligent service is always at your command, gracious and esteemed lords. 

The German practices of astronomy have hitherto faced much criticism among people of all ranks and have often been regarded as mere books of lies in many ways. 

Until now, the German practices of astronomy have been regarded with great disdain and have been considered as mere lies by many. 

Now, it is no less the case that if the art of astronomy, and its practices, sought to extend themselves so far as to infringe upon the Almighty Lord and God's power, wisdom, and foresight, and to encompass God's almighty power within their rules, statutes, and ordinances, then indeed it would be no wonder that such fierce criticism has been leveled against these practices by every honorable and devout Christian. 

If the art of astronomy and its practices were to reach such a level that they might challenge the Almighty Lord and God in His power, wisdom, and foresight, and constrain God’s omnipotence within their rules, regulations, and statutes, it would indeed be no wonder that such disdain would be cast upon these practices by every honorable, pious Christian. 

But whoever desires to follow the truth rather than dismiss an art with which they are inexperienced and unfamiliar, without doubt would consider well that no honorable mind and heart would joyfully rise up against our Almighty Creator and seek to overpower God's eternal foresight with astronomy or any other art and wisdom. 

However, anyone who desires to acknowledge the truth rather than disparage an art unknown to him will undoubtedly recognize that no honorable mind or heart would wish to oppose our Almighty Creator and seek to use astronomy or any other art and wisdom to surpass God’s eternal foresight. 

For, according to the teachings of the holy apostle Paul, we are well aware that God's almighty power cannot be circumscribed, that His judgments are unsearchable, His ways unfathomable, no one has been His counselor, but from Him, through Him, and to Him are all things. 

For, according to the teaching of the holy Apostle Paul, we know well that God’s almighty power cannot be circumscribed, that His judgments are unsearchable, His ways unfathomable, no one has been His counselor, but from Him, through Him, and to Him are all things. 

Also, we know that all things we wish to accomplish and do, in word and deed, should begin and end not in the name of the movement of the heavens, nor from the wisdom of the art of astronomy, but in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has been set and appointed by God, His heavenly Father, as the treasure of all divine knowledge. 

We also know that whatever we undertake and do, in words and deeds, we should begin and end not in the name of the course of the heavens, not from the wisdom of the art of astronomy, but in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has been appointed and ordained by God His heavenly Father as the treasure of all divine knowledge. 

However, since our Almighty Lord and God first created the heavens and the sun and moon and other stars by His word and power, and will move and revolve them powerfully until the end of the world, and since He has ordained that the sun and the earth's vegetation respond to one another in such a way that anyone endowed with common human understanding daily observes how all vegetation on earth blooms joyfully in the sunlight and dies back and decays in winter's withdrawal of the sun, 

However, since our Almighty Lord and God, through His word and power, first created the heavens, the sun and moon in the heavens, and other stars, and will powerfully move and revolve them until the end of the world, He has also made the sun and the earth’s plants so that they are appropriately connected. Every person, endowed with common human understanding, daily observes how all plants on earth, due to the inclination of the sun, open up joyfully in the spring and wither and decay in the winter. 

what should prevent us from recognizing that other similar natural occurrences on earth, namely, rain, heat, warmth, fertility, poor crops, peace, and war, are also indicated and observed from the natural order of the planets created by God? 

What should then prevent us from recognizing that other similar natural occurrences on earth, such as rain, heat, fertility, famine, peace, and war, also derive from the natural order of the planets created by God and can be observed? 

Therefore, divine power suffers no detriment, as He remains a ruler and protector of those who place their hope and trust in Him alone. 

This does not detract from God’s divine power; He remains the ruler and protector of those who hope in Him alone and place their trust in Him. 

He can, without the movement of the heavens, empower those who humble themselves before Him and humble those who exalt themselves against Him. 

He can still, without the course of the heavens, empower those who humble themselves before Him and humble those who exalt themselves against Him. 

Thus, divine or earthly power loses nothing by the true art of astronomy but rather is greatly enhanced. 

Indeed, nothing is taken away from divine, orderly power, and through the true art of astronomy, much more can be conveyed to the Almighty God. 

For the true divine astronomy is nothing other than a rule and measure of divine earthly action, which the Almighty God established and ordained through His creation of the heavens and the stars, not that He confined Himself within this order, but that He works and acts through the highest to the lowest in this world according to His common order. 

For true divine astronomy is nothing else but a measure and standard of divine orderly work, which the Almighty God enacts and accomplishes through His own creation, the heavens and the stars, not because He is confined within this order, but because He works and acts through this order from the highest to the lowest in this world. 

Therefore, no one needs to fear the stars and their influence, as the prophet Jeremiah attests. 

Therefore, no one should fear the stars or their movements, as the prophet Jeremiah attests; 

The righteous will not be troubled by the stars, and it is fitting for them to fear only God as their Lord. 

the stars do not show anything evil to the pious. They alone have God as their Lord to fear. 

But the wicked always protect themselves, whether the stars are favorable or unfavorable. 

But the wicked must always beware, whether the stars are favorable or unfavorable. 

Even if the stars promise them great fortune in this world, what use is it if they use such fortune for their misfortune due to their wickedness? 

Even if the stars indicate great fortune in this world, what good is it if they use such fortune for their misfortune out of wickedness? 

Thus, divine power suffers no loss, but rather divine order is clarified. 

Thus, divine power is not diminished in any way, but rather is explained in a more orderly fashion. 

Therefore, based on the teachings and counsel of the experienced in this art, I have wanted to reveal and publish the inclinations and influences of the stars, signs, and planets of this coming year, not arbitrarily but as a warning, and to present them in print for your special benefit, esteemed sirs. 

Therefore, I have taken from the teachings and counsel of experienced practitioners of this art the inclination and influence of the stars, signs, and planets for this coming year, not out of necessity, but as a warning, and have decided to publish and distribute them in print for your special benefit. 

I will always remain dutifully and obediently subject to you, my gracious commanding sirs. Given on the day of John the Baptist, the 24th of June, 1528.

I will remain, now and at all times, your obedient, dutiful, and submissive servant, devoted to E. F. W. Given on the day of John the Baptist, the 24th of June, in the year 1528. 

Humbly yours, appointed doctor, Anthonius Brelochs, Doctor.

E. F. W. Obedient, appointed physician, Anthonius Brelochs, Doctor.























