<page01>
<sec01>
Practica Teutsch for the year of Christ
Jesus Christ our savior, fifteen hundred and twenty-nine, derived from the teachings of the wise and experienced in the stars, for the special benefit of people, and compiled by Anthonium Brelochs, Doctor of natural science and medicine in Schwebisch Hall, appointed physician, briefly summarized.

<page02>
<sec02>
To the steadfast, honorable, prudent, and wise Mayor and Council of the city of Schwebisch Hall, my gracious and esteemed lords.
Esteemed, honorable, prudent, and wise E. F. W., my very willing and diligent service is always at your command, gracious and esteemed lords. Until now, the German practices of astronomy have been regarded with great disdain and have been considered as mere lies by many. If the art of astronomy and its practices were to reach such a level that they might challenge the Almighty Lord and God in His power, wisdom, and foresight, and constrain God’s omnipotence within their rules, regulations, and statutes, it would indeed be no wonder that such disdain would be cast upon these practices by every honorable, pious Christian. However, anyone who desires to acknowledge the truth rather than disparage an art unknown to him will undoubtedly recognize that no honorable mind or heart would wish to oppose our Almighty Creator and seek to use astronomy or any other art and wisdom to surpass God’s eternal foresight. For, according to the teaching of the holy Apostle Paul, we know well that God’s almighty power cannot be circumscribed, that His judgments are unsearchable, His ways unfathomable, no one has been His counselor, but from Him, through Him, and to Him are all things. We also know that whatever we undertake and do, in words and deeds, we should begin and end not in the name of the course of the heavens, not from the wisdom of the art of astronomy, but in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has been appointed and ordained by God His heavenly Father as the treasure of all divine knowledge. However, since our Almighty Lord and God, through His word and power, first created the heavens, the sun and moon in the heavens, and other stars, and will powerfully move and revolve them until the end of the world, He has also made the sun and the earth’s plants so that they are appropriately connected. Every person, endowed with common human understanding, daily observes how all plants on earth, due to the inclination of the sun, open up joyfully in the spring and wither and decay in the winter. What should then prevent us from recognizing that other similar natural occurrences on earth, such as rain, heat, fertility, famine, peace, and war, also derive from the natural order of the planets created by God and can be observed? This does not detract from God’s divine power; He remains the ruler and protector of those who hope in Him alone and place their trust in Him. He can still, without the course of the heavens, empower those who humble themselves before Him and humble those who exalt themselves against Him. Indeed, nothing is taken away from divine, orderly power, and through the true art of astronomy, much more can be conveyed to the Almighty God. For true divine astronomy is nothing else but a measure and standard of divine orderly work, which the Almighty God enacts and accomplishes through His own creation, the heavens and the stars, not because He is confined within this order, but because He works and acts through this order from the highest to the lowest in this world. Therefore, no one should fear the stars or their movements, as the prophet Jeremiah attests; the stars do not show anything evil to the pious. They alone have God as their Lord to fear. But the wicked must always beware, whether the stars are favorable or unfavorable. Even if the stars indicate great fortune in this world, what good is it if they use such fortune for their misfortune out of wickedness? Thus, divine power is not diminished in any way, but rather is explained in a more orderly fashion. Therefore, I have taken from the teachings and counsel of experienced practitioners of this art the inclination and influence of the stars, signs, and planets for this coming year, not out of necessity, but as a warning, and have decided to publish and distribute them in print for your special benefit. I will remain, now and at all times, your obedient, dutiful, and submissive servant, devoted to E. F. W. Given on the day of John the Baptist, the 24th of June, in the year 1528.
E. F. W.
Obedient, appointed physician,
Anthonius Brelochs, Doctor.

<sec03>
On the Eclipse of the Moon.
¶ The moon will be eclipsed on Sunday after Galli, the 17th of the wine month, in the third degree of Taurus, at the sign of its exaltation, beginning at 7 o'clock, the middle at 8 o'clock and 27 minutes, and ending at 10 o'clock and 4 minutes before noon. This will be best seen at sunset and is likely to bring much trouble and distress. May God turn it to the best.

<sec04>
Which Planet is Assigned the Rulership and is Considered the Ruler of this Year 1529.
¶ For brevity’s sake, leaving aside the common causes of the heavens, such as the lord of the great cycle, which completes in three hundred and sixty years, the parts, the perfection of the great conjunction, which sufficiently explain and reveal my prognostication, I turn my attention to the planet that will hold the rulership above all others in this coming year. Considering the strength, power, and all the influence of the planets in the twelve signs, especially when the sun enters the beginning of the four cardinal signs, namely Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn, along with the celestial positions of the preceding new and full moons, I proclaim according to the teaching of Ptolemy in his second tract of the Quadripartitum, and also Haly and other ancient experienced practitioners of this art, that the gentle and humorous Venus, since she is found in both figures of prevention and revolution in the best sections and highest degrees, will be the ruler of this coming year. Yet, the unkind and bloodthirsty Mars, a part of the great cycle, will be seen in his exaltation, standing very close by. Therefore, this year will be ruled by the fickle Venus, with her co-ruler the dreadful Mars, to whom Mercury and the envious Saturn will lend not a little assistance. According to the course and nature of these planets (according to the opinion of Leopold of Austria), the fate of all earthly matters in this coming year will be known. What is now to be expected in the future from the above-indicated fates will be noted simply in substance in the following without any particular addition.

<sec05>
How the fruits of all growing things will be indicated this year in terms of high prices, abundance, rise, and decline.

¶ According to the influence of the heavens and as much as can be noted from the principal constellations, since the higher things grant these lower, earthly things their strength to grow and be increased in their growth, this year in our horizon is more inclined toward fertility than infertility, or at least it will hold a balance between the two. As for the specific kinds of fruits, I say that grain, wheat, barley, and oats will show decent growth. And although grain and also other fruits may experience some setbacks, this will somewhat occur due to slow growth, which will later be alleviated by a fruitful mild climate and will refresh what has been somewhat delayed before. The wine, although it will have decent growth in many places of our region, will also experience fluctuations. Some areas, particularly towards the west and south, should be warned to protect their vineyards from significant cold and moisture, frost, and stormy rain with hail. To summarize this chapter briefly, I say that most of the stars indicate sufficient fertility in wine and all other kinds of fruits, provided they do not suffer from cold and frost in spring, and subsequently from stormy wind and rain in summer. Nevertheless, God, the creator of the stars and all the growth on earth, will arrange these and other things according to His divine will.

<sec06>
On the wars, disputes, quarrels, uprisings, and adversities to be expected this year.

¶ Although Venus has the nature and temperament of Jupiter, inclined to goodness and peace, yet Mars, the treacherous star, with his merciless, cruel, stormy malice and enmities, will share the rulership of the great cycle in this coming year, found in the sign of his exaltation, along with Saturn and Mercury, all in significant positions in the celestial figures, in many lands and provinces, particularly towards the west, south, and north, powerful dissensions and contentious uprisings, unheard-of sadness, much injustice, anger, fire, bloodshed, murder, destruction of dwellings, along with other martial adversities and injustices, will be stirred by their influences. There will be seen some armaments which will be difficult to pacify, but in some places more inclined to peace and unity than to the ruin of the country. Although at the beginning of the year and in early summer, discord and great unrest are to be expected, it will be prudent for Germany to be cautious, as significant threats loom. It is also to be feared that this year may hardly reach its end without discord and war among the powerful and mighty. Many will feel envy and hatred, for as Haly Abenrabel says, when Mars is found in the third house of revolution, it indicates that people will not soon come together, and envy, hatred, animosity, and adversity will arise among the people. Great kings, princes, and all authorities should be cautious not to give too much freedom to their subjects, for Mars, the bloodthirsty one, when found in a declining house of revolution, shows that the common people, the subjects, will have little sense and courage to wage wars and also to rebel against their authorities. It is not little to affirm that this coming year's wars, discord, and martial conflicts will extend for some time and be somewhat persistent, as Mars indicates while being found in his house. Therefore, we should fervently call upon and pray to God, who created the heavens and the stars, that He may turn all things according to His divine will for the salvation of our souls.

<sec07>
On the illnesses that will be more dangerous for humans and animals this year due to the influence of the stars.

¶ From a diligent consideration of the erected celestial figures of the planets, also of the other fixed stars, at the time of the sun’s entry into the first points of Aries and other cardinal signs, it is indicated that in this coming year, people will be more prone to harmful, and at times deadly, diseases. Since the moon, after separating from the sun in prevention, inclines towards the wrathful planet Mars, who, as mentioned above, will share rulership in his power and exaltation with Venus, according to the teaching of Ptolemy and Albumasar, it indicates sudden and swift death, sharp intermittent fevers, bloody and severe sores, and other diseases arising from heated, corrupted blood. Many people in the south, north, and also towards the west will come into mortal danger through thin, bloody flux of the bowels. Also, Saturn found in Taurus moderately indicates that many places in the world will experience various harmful diseases due to manifold natural causes, as well as pollution, disturbance, and unnatural changes in the atmosphere. Thus, the plague is to be greatly feared this year, and it will be found quite dangerous for the inhabitants of the seventh climate. Albumasar publicly attests that when Saturn completes his course in Taurus and is found in a forward position, it indicates illnesses of the upper limbs among people, general illnesses in this year to be expected, headaches, catarrh, eye and ear aches, nasal polyps, throat ailments, chest diseases, coughs, stomach aches, liver congestion, urinary retention, dropsy, gout, intestinal pain. Both sexes are warned against severe sores and pains in the private and shameful parts. Notable epidemics are also indicated among the livestock due to the stars. We should diligently pray to God, our creator and healer, that He may grant us grace to abstain from these various illnesses with which He often punishes us, and to amend our lives for the salvation of our souls.

<page06>
<sec08>
On the conditions of people according to the nature and order of the seven planets, briefly summarized.

¶ All people who are subjected to the planet Saturn and follow his rule, such as elderly people, monks, rough craftsmen, masons, and those who have a fervent love for agriculture, and all those in whom the earthly nature, called Melancholia, is found in excess, and those who are very deceitful, will lead their lives in a dangerous and deadly state, enduring adversities from their authorities. Their endeavors will often be thwarted, and they will encounter great deceit, causing them losses in trade, counsel, substance, and bodily nourishment. The monks will be persecuted, miners will suffer in the earth mines, and farmers will be troubled in many places by poor harvests. All people under the power of Saturn must preserve their bodies from excessive harmful moisture, which could bring severe diseases that would quickly take many of them away. They will be in danger of the plague, and they are warned against headaches, chest and stomach pains, gout, fevers, dysentery, dropsy, and paralysis of the hands and feet. The times particularly worrisome for them will be March, May, and the beginning of autumn until the end of the year.

¶ Those who are obedient to the planet Jupiter with their customs and practices, such as clergy in general with their rulers, and elderly sanguine people, will experience little joy and prosperity. They will face much danger from common people due to envy, hatred, and anger. Many among them will engage in various disputes with their subjects and among themselves, complaining against one another without particular cause, but solely out of envy and hatred, mixed with deceit, causing them significant distress, anxiety, and severe dissatisfaction, from which they will find it difficult to free themselves, enduring labor, work, anxiety, and need. They will also be somewhat tightly bound by the bonds of distress when martial and contentious people strive to harass them. They will be threatened with shortages of sustenance. They should guard themselves against gout, bad sores from excess blood, hip and foot pains, hot fevers, and the plague. This year they should protect themselves as much as possible from the beginning of the year until the end of March, also in May and December, as these times will be particularly unfavorable and worrisome for them.

¶ Those subjected to the planet Mars and using his rule, such as counts, barons, knights, soldiers, and all people who work with water and those who work with fire, and the choleric by nature, who are hot-tempered and prone to anger, will experience considerable luck and success in many matters, and in their public actions will receive some praise and honor. However, in summer and thereafter, they are warned not to experience any misfortune due to adversities and deceit, with evil and unstable opposition against one another. The knightly and military people (according to the teaching of Albumasar) will seek disputes with their enemies this year, causing many to lose their spirits, some fleeing from one place to another. They will be prone to severe sores, hot fevers, and illnesses, causing many to pass away quickly. They are also warned against bloody dysentery and blood-spitting. The most dangerous times for them will be January, May, until the end of August, September, and December, during which they should refrain from military actions aimed at gaining victory.

¶ Great kings, princes, and lords, born of high power and noble lineage, with their governors and administrators, and those who rule with great wisdom, discipline, honor, and friendly will, along with the virtuous nobility, all under the power of the Sun, will experience unfortunate and disobedient adversity among themselves. Despite their friendliness towards one another, envy and hatred will hover among them, with considerable fidelity felt among them. Some will be very greedy for nourishment and goods, thereby burdening their people, and should be warned not to provoke their subjects to rebellion and adversity. Some will be cautious not to be humiliated, as the stars threaten them with severe occurrences and deadly illnesses. Their more adverse times will be January, May, August, and December.

¶ Those who are subjected to the planet Venus with their customs and practices, such as women, maidens, musicians, all cheerful and frivolous people, and lovers of fleshly lust, will experience some happiness this year, with a cheerful disposition towards pleasure, causing many to fall into arrogance and pride, intolerable towards one another. However, some will be faced with death when Mars provokes and ignites them to excessive lust, causing them to fall into deadly illnesses. If they abstain from gluttony, idleness, and association with fires and strikes, this influence will have no effect on them, as the wise ruler over the stars indicates. They will be in danger of illnesses of the throat, swelling of the body, stomach pains, liver congestion from cold, and also sharp, poisonous fevers. The plague will also be dangerous for some. Their adverse days are the 13th of January, the 18th of May, June until the end of August, the 30th of September, and the 15th of December. If they pass these times and days without adversity and evil illnesses, they will otherwise feel a sufficiently happy year, in which women will give birth joyfully.

¶ Those subjected to the planet Mercury, such as merchants, writers, accountants, astronomers, doctors, book printers, and poets, and all those engaged in subtle arts and trades, will not have much luck. For, as Albumasar attests, when Mars looks at Mercury with an evil aspect, those mentioned above will have little luck in their endeavors and trade; they will be despised and oppressed by the authorities. Merchants will suffer great losses on the water due to storms and tempests, and they should also be wary of being robbed of their goods along the way. Likewise, officials, councilors of princes, and city councilors who manage their finances should be prudent and wise to avoid misfortune from their lords and the community. Their unfavorable times will be from the beginning of the year until the end of February, March, April until the end of May, June, August until mid-September, and December, during which they should hope for no particular good luck, although the other times will also be somewhat worrisome. The stars threaten them with pestilential fevers, deadly diseases of the head, eye illnesses, throat illnesses, gout, stone disease, and also intestinal gout.

¶ People who have their occupation and rule under the moon, such as travelers, sailors, fishermen, bathers, and all common people who lead an unstable life and are engaged with water, will find adverse luck this year. They will be hostile towards princes and lords and their authorities and suffer much from their lords against the common people. Some will gain little benefit from their goods and nourishment and will suffer damage from the military, receiving such harm. They will cause much rebellion and disputes among themselves, brother against brother, friend against friend, and companions may betray each other. Some will strive to rebel against their rulers, leading to concerns that civil and domestic unrest may arise in many places. Therefore, rulers and councils of lords and cities should be vigilant to resist this evil. Many will suffer from head illnesses, eye pains with paralysis of the limbs. Those living towards the east and west are warned against the plague. Their adverse days are when the moon moves from the 15th degree of Libra to the 15th degree of Scorpio, with evil aspects of the sun, envious Saturn, and dreadful Mars.

<sec09>
On the conditions of some kingdoms, lands, and cities on the circle of the earth.

¶ Germany, Little Poland, wherein lies the royal city of Krakow, Austria, Florence, Naples, Brunswick, France, Burgundy, and according to some opinions Augsburg, these lands and cities should guard against destruction through war and the breaking of some dwellings, experiencing bloodshed in many places. The inhabitants thereof will live in discord among themselves, some surrounded by many anxieties and needs, suffering imprisonment. Some lords and rulers of these lands will do evil to the people, greatly burdening them. Some among them will live very tyrannically towards their subjects, and they should be warned not to be deprived of their power or otherwise perish miserably. Also, some lords in these places will be greatly feared by the common people. And when sharp cold, heavy rain, frost, and hailstorms threaten to damage the fruits and growing things of the earth, this will mercifully pass if some of them have more than they hoped for, and if the plague does not prevail among them, they will give thanks to God.

¶ The kingdoms of Spain, Hungary, the land of Moravia, and also the duchy of Milan, if they are not cautious, will feel intense war from the west, also dreadful uprisings as the common people in these places will rise up. Therefore, the lords and authorities of these lands must always be vigilant to guard against this. The stars threaten them with harm which may be caused by thunder, hail, lightning, and stormy winds. If wine and grain are not damaged thereby, they will have a rich growth. Many will suffer from severe poisonous sores, also the plague, and the four-legged animals will carry disease upon their backs.

¶ Italy, Bohemia, Austria, Sicily, Apulia, France towards Italy, Magdeburg, and also some cities in Lombardy will strive against their enemies, and also regret past actions which they will rue having carried out. Some princes, lords, and authorities in these places will ally themselves with noble people from foreign lands and will attempt to take over the rule and power from some other princes and lords, acting unlawfully. Also, some princes, lords, and powerful people in these places will be cruel towards the people, showing little compassion. The common people of these lands will be very inclined to war and discord, thus suffering cruel adversities. They will face various illnesses, which may arise from winds or from excess blood.

¶ Thuringia, Saxony, Hesse, Switzerland, Prussia, Russia, Bologna, Bamberg, and the small whole of Asia will prepare for arms, through which they will come into distress and danger. Some will suffer great persecution from their authorities and will also be very contentious among themselves, leading to bloodshed. They will experience much opposition from the surrounding lands, and in their endeavors and plans, they will mostly be hindered. Their authorities are warned that some may be taken by deadly illnesses, which could lead to the destruction of the land. The fruits and growth of the earth will be damaged in some places by excess moisture and bad air. Sudden death will take many through the plague.

¶ Swabia, Franconia, Alsace, Sundgau, Nuremberg, Augsburg, Salzburg, Ulm, Erfurt, Frankfurt, Heidelberg, Speyer, and the surrounding cities, if they are not cautious this year, will see discord arise in many places among them. Some will be rebellious against their authorities, speaking evil and casting out vile, lying words. And if they are not attacked by the martial and some princely and powerful lords, they will otherwise have a fairly prosperous year. If they encounter some adversity, it will pass without significant harm. They will have a reasonable growth of the earth's fruits in wine and grain. However, they will not be without some illnesses, particularly suffering from head diseases, hip, hand, and foot pains, and some will also perish through sudden illnesses and the plague. They should also guard against gout and all intestinal diseases.

<sec10a>
On the fortunes and changes of the weather and storms in the four seasons of the year, with indications of the twelve months, their new, breaking, and quarter moons, and initially on the state of winter.

¶ The winter (which according to astrological reckoning) begins on the 11th day of December at 6 hours and no minutes after noon. According to the general influence of the stars, it will tend towards moderate cold, although in many places and cities towards the west, south, and north there will be sharp cold for many days, threatening damage to many things. In warm lands, moist weather with much snow will occur. It is to be expected that during this time in some places, there will be great stormy winds, comparable to earthquakes, but most dangerous to those living towards the south and west. The illnesses that will be most worrisome during this time are headaches, strokes, chest ailments, coughs, side pains, throat abscesses, catarrh, gout, diarrhea, bladder and kidney pains, and also the plague, for which those living towards the south and north should be most concerned, although others will also scarcely feel safe from it. The four-legged animals used for human benefit will also be sickly, and some of them will die.

¶ On New Year's Day, the first of the Roman year, it will be very windy, cold in some places, and cloudy.
¶ The last quarter moon on Saturday after New Year's Day at 8 hours and 18 minutes after noon will be unsettled, though cold according to the season, also moist with winds mixed with midnight rain in many places until the evening of the Holy Three Kings. On St. Erhard's Day and the next day, there will be a notable change in the air with wind and moisture in some places with hail.
¶ New moon on Sunday after St. Erhard’s Day at 9 hours and 5 minutes before noon will be cold with sharp winds, sudden moisture, and running black and cloudy skies. On the following Monday, strong cold winds will follow, then snow or rain depending on the location, continuing in many places until the following Wednesday. Friday after St. Felix will bring cloudy air, in many places causing moisture with wind.
¶ First quarter moon on St. Ambrose’s Day at 1 hour and 28 minutes before noon, this quarter will generally have unsettled, though cold and dark air, followed in cold lands by snowy moisture with hail, but rain in warm lands. Around St. Prisca's Day, cold cloudy air with midnight winds and sudden moisture or rain depending on the cities, lasting until St. Sebastian’s Day. On St. Vincent's Day, windy and dark air.
¶ Full moon on Sunday after St. Sebastian’s Day at 42 minutes after noon will be cloudy, foggy, and unsettled with moist winds, which in some places will be stormy, lasting in many places until the following Tuesday after the conversion of St. Paul. Friday after the conversion of St. Paul or close by, cold wind, in many places on the following Saturday bringing snow or rain depending on the location. Sunday thereafter, cold wind with dark sky.
¶ Last quarter moon on the evening of our Lady's Candlemas at 4 hours and 3 minutes after noon will be cold, windy, in many places with sudden moisture, dark clouds mixed with red, lasting until St. Blasius’s Day. On St. Agatha’s Day, Saturday and Sunday following, strong and cold wind, after which snow or rain will fall.
¶ New moon in March on Monday after St. Dorothy’s Day at 8 hours and 17 minutes after noon will be cold, cloudy air with sudden moisture in mountains, but otherwise rain with midnight winds. Tuesday and Wednesday thereafter, cold moist wind and inconvenient clouds. On St. Valentine’s evening and the next day, cold with dark sky, in many places with strong winds bringing sudden moisture.
¶ First quarter moon on Monday after St. Valentine’s Day at 10 hours and 58 minutes before noon will be unsettled weather, now cold, then cloudy with dark cloudy air with sharp winds. Around St. Julian’s Day, Wednesday and Thursday thereafter, windy with cloudy rain, in mountains sudden moisture. Saturday and Sunday after St. Julian’s Day, stormy, cloudy, cold air, tending to fog or rain.
¶ Full moon in March on the evening of St. Matthias’s Day at 6 hours and 25 minutes before noon will be windy, cold, with running clouds, in many places cloudy with rain or snow depending on the location. On St. Matthias’s Day, strong wind, in some places bringing rain. Around Friday after St. Matthias’s Day, a change to cold, cloudy air, in some places with heavy rain. In warm lands, thunder will be heard. Sunday after St. Matthias’s Day, cold, windy, dark air, in some places noticeable moist rain. Around Tuesday, wind from the north.
¶ Last quarter moon on Wednesday after the third Sunday in Lent at 8 hours and 58 minutes before noon will be cold, windy, with rain. In warm lands, thunder may be heard around this time. Friday, Saturday thereafter, and Sunday Mid-Lent, cold, snowy air with darkness, in some places rain. Tuesday after Mid-Lent, wind with rain.
¶ New moon in April on Wednesday after Mid-Lent at 5 hours and 44 minutes before noon will be a mixed unsettled time with cold winds, dark air, in many places rain.
¶ On the brightness and its new and full moons.
¶ The beginning of brightness, which according to its nature is known to be warm and moist, during which, according to all doctors' opinions, the blood in humans is most agitated, occurs (according to the aforementioned reckoning) on the 10th day of March at 7 hours and 16 minutes after noon. It will have moderately tempered days, but strong and cold winds will often occur, bringing sudden and cold moisture with rain or frost in many places, threatening damage to the fruits and growth of the earth, particularly towards the west and south. In some places, thunder will be heard with much lightning. The illnesses that will be most worrisome during this quarter will be headaches, eye pains, throat abscesses, swollen tonsils, red pustules and eruptions, bloody expectorations, stomach and liver ailments from cold and also from excessive eating and drinking, bloody diarrhea, diseases of the shameful parts of both sexes, severe sharp fevers, in many places the plague will be felt, and during this time death will be very dangerous for children, youth of both sexes. In many places, the fruits will be damaged by worms.
¶ On St. Gregory's Day and the days following, dark cloudy air, windy cold rain. Around Monday after St. Gregory's Day, moist with cold winds, yet in warm places thunder will be heard with lightning.
¶ First quarter moon on Tuesday after St. Gregory's Day at 11 hours and 1 minute after noon will be unsettled weather, cold, moist, and windy, in many places red clouds will be seen. Thursday after St. Gertrude’s Day, cold, dark with winds, bringing rainy moisture, in many places frost, lasting until the following Saturday.
¶ Full moon in April on the evening of the Annunciation of Our Lady at 11 hours and 48 minutes after noon will bring great destructive unhealthy changes in the air, strong wind with rain and hail, in many places thunder. On Easter Eve and Easter Day, dark air, cold cloudy rain with strong winds. Around Tuesday thereafter, cloudy rain bringing also windy.
¶ Last quarter moon on Thursday after Easter Day at 10 hours and 33 minutes after noon will be unsettled and of mixed nature with strong moist winds, also running clouds and fog. Saturday thereafter tending to wind and cold moisture with snow or rain. Wednesday after Quasimodo Geniti or close by, wind with cold rain. In cold lands, careful harmful cold to be expected with frost.
¶ New moon in May on Thursday after Quasimodo Geniti at 2 hours and 5 minutes after noon will bring sharp cold wind with rain and hail, in some places frost and stormy weather, lasting for three days thereafter. On the Sunday of Misericordia Domini, cold windy rain. Around St. Tyburtius, many places will be moist.
¶ First quarter moon on Thursday after St. Tyburtius at 47 minutes after noon will arise with strong winds, bringing cold rain, also in some places frost to be expected, lasting in many places until the following Saturday. Sunday and Monday or close by, moderate wind bringing rain. On St. George's Eve, in many places rain with hail and wind, scarcely passing without thunder.
¶ Full moon in May on St. George’s Day at 3 hours and 51 minutes after noon will bring cold air with inconvenient clouds, also being unsettled due to moisture, lasting in many places until the following Sunday. Monday after St. Mark’s Day or close by, a change in the air, at the least through wind and rainy clouds, in some places thunder or dangerous storms, lasting in many places until St. Vitalis’s Day.
¶ Last quarter moon on St. Philip and St. James’s Day at 8 hours and 8 minutes before noon will arise with cold rain, in some places with hail and storminess through thunder. And it will be worrisome for the growth of the earth due to some frost. Tuesday after Holy Cross Day, also Thursday thereafter, wind in many places bringing rain, along with thunder.
¶ New moon in June on Friday after the discovery of the Holy Cross at 9 hours and 55 minutes after noon will be moist in many places with cold winds and clouds, in warm places occasionally thunder. Sunday thereafter, strong wind and rain, possibly thunder. Around the following Tuesday in many places moist wind. Around St. Servatius and the following Friday, cloudy air with wind, in many places rain.
¶ First quarter moon on Pentecost Eve at 3 hours and 46 minutes before noon, mostly cold air with clouds and sharp winds, in many places sudden rain, also a hard time lasting until Pentecost. Around the following Thursday and Friday, windy with rain.
¶ Full moon in June on Trinity Sunday at 5 hours and 54 minutes before noon will be cold, windy, dark, mixed with moisture, in some places thunder with lightning. Around the Feast of Corpus Christi, cloudy, wind and rain with hail, in warm places thunder, in cold places frost to be expected, lasting until the next day thereafter.
¶ Last quarter moon on Sunday after St. Urban's Day at 2 hours and 30 minutes after noon will be unsettled weather with running clouds, also windy with rain, in many places thunder to be heard. On St. Erasmus’s Day and the days following, cold, rain, hail, also windy with stormy weather greatly to be expected.
¶ New moon in July on Sunday after St. Boniface’s Day at 6 hours and 18 minutes before noon will be somewhat warm with clouds, in many places stormy with rain. Wednesday and Thursday after St. Boniface’s Day, moderate wind with rain, thunder with lightning, and in some places stormy weather.

<sec10b>
¶ On the summer and its new and full moons.
¶ The summer (which, according to its inherent temperament, is hot and dry, in which cholera moves and rules significantly) begins on the 12th day of June at 6 hours and 21 minutes before noon. It will be moderately warm with some warm days, yet unsettled with many stormy winds, with overflowing clouds, and thus very moist with rain, sometimes with much thunder and lightning. This quarter will not be without hot and evil sores, boils, pains of the body, bladder, legs, and eyes. Many will feel the plague and sudden death.

¶ First quarter moon on Sunday after St. Barnabas's Day at 7 hours and 55 minutes after noon will have tempered days, yet in many places will be windy and moist. On the following Thursday and Friday, changes, sometimes with thunderstorms and downpours, in many places stormy winds and great thunderstorms will be found. Around the Sunday after St. Vitus’s Day, rain with midday winds.

¶ Full moon in June on St. Alban’s Day at 6 hours and 1 minute after noon. Generally, this quarter will tend towards wind and moisture, in many places thunder with lightning and rain. On St. John the Baptist’s Day and the days following, strong wind with rain, in some places thunder and stormy weather will be heard.

¶ Last quarter moon on the evening of St. Peter and St. Paul’s Day at 6 hours and 7 minutes after noon, inclined towards tempered weather with winds, sometimes thunder, hail with lightning, and downpours. Wednesday and Thursday thereafter, cloudy mixed with strong winds, mostly rain in many places. On the day of the Visitation of the Virgin Mary or close by, strong wind with noticeable rain, many places thunder and lightning.

¶ New moon in August on Monday after St. Ulrich’s Day at 4 hours and 2 minutes after noon, unsettled with winds, thunder and lightning heard, somewhat damaging, with large hail and downpours. Wednesday and Thursday thereafter, strong wind and rain, possibly with hail, in many places thunder and storms extending until the following Friday.

¶ First quarter moon on St. Margaret’s Day at 35 minutes after noon, unsettled weather, yet very inclined to strong winds with rain, in many places thunder and storms noted, which will last for three days.

¶ Full moon in August on the evening of St. Mary Magdalene’s Day at 4 hours and 30 minutes before noon, unsettled weather with strong winds bringing rain, with damaging storms, thunder, and lightning. On St. Mary Magdalene’s Day, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday following, great stormy winds, also in some regions thunder with lightning and other storms with downpours.

¶ Last quarter moon on Tuesday after St. James’s Day at 10 hours and 8 minutes after noon, the same time and the day following tempered in heat with running clouds, blowing winds, in many places rain and thunder extending until the following Thursday. Thursday after St. Pantaleon’s Day, inclined to moist winds.

¶ New moon in September on Wednesday after St. Peter in Chains Day at 3 hours and 58 minutes before noon, foggy and cold with winds and rain, also in some places frost to be expected. On St. Sixtus’s Day or near it, clouds mixed with strong winds, in some regions rain refreshing. On St. Lawrence’s Day, moderate wind with rain.

¶ First quarter moon on Thursday after St. Lawrence’s Day at 5 hours and 39 minutes before noon, which will have a cloudy moisture in the air, in some places with hail and thunder and other storms. Saturday after St. Lawrence’s Day or near it, rain with hail, stormy wind. Around the Tuesday after the Assumption of Mary, moderate wind with rain without thunder, scarcely passing without lightning.

¶ Full moon in September on Thursday after the Assumption of Mary at 2 hours and 1 minute after noon, unsettled weather with wind, tempered in cold, and possibly rain and storms extending in many places until the following Saturday. On the evening of St. Bartholomew’s Day, changing to noticeable moisture and stormy winds with storms, lasting until the following Wednesday.

¶ Last quarter moon on Thursday after St. Bartholomew’s Day at 4 hours and 21 minutes before noon, unsettled weather, sometimes wind with moisture of rain. Around the Friday after St. Bartholomew’s Day, windy with rain. Monday after St. Augustine’s Day or near it, dark cloudy air, in many places moist with winds. Around St. Giles’s Day, a change in the air to cold and tempered moisture.

¶ New moon in October on Thursday after St. Giles’s Day at 6 hours and 34 minutes after noon, tempered air, sometimes inclined to moisture with strong blowing winds. Saturday after St. Giles’s Day or near it, strong and steady wind, yet especially dark and gloomy weather. On the day of the Nativity of Mary, inclined to cold and moisture, in some places frost to be expected.

¶ First quarter moon on Friday after the Nativity of Mary at 10 hours and 14 minutes after noon, moist cloudy air, with some warmth, the day following windy.

¶ Autumn with its new and full moons.
¶ The beginning of autumn, by its own nature cold and dry, in which Melancholia is most apparent, will be on the 13th day of September at 7 hours and 45 minutes after noon, tending towards unsettled and cold weather with cruel winds, also moist with some showers, in many places persistent rain felt. People will experience bodily swellings, throat pains, rare evil poisonous sores, eye pains, catarrh, ear ringing from cold, severe and powerful fevers. During this quarter, thunder and lightning will be noticed, at times with fog. On the Exaltation of the Holy Cross Day, cloudy, in many places also moist air with winds, in many places lasting until the following Thursday.

¶ Full moon in October on Friday after the Exaltation of the Holy Cross at 11 hours and 8 minutes after noon, inclined to moderate weather, yet windy, in some places scarcely passing without rainy moisture. Around the evening of St. Matthew’s Day and the following day, dark times, cold rain, wind, and unsettled weather, in some places possibly thunder.

¶ Last quarter moon on Friday after St. Matthew’s Day at 2 hours and 2 minutes after noon, moist with winds, also foggy and frosty. Monday after St. Maurice’s Day, cloudy air with winds, in some places rain extending in many regions until Thursday after St. Michael’s Day.

¶ New moon in November on Saturday after St. Remigius’s Day at 11 hours and 31 minutes before noon, will begin with darkness, with rain and winds. Tuesday and Wednesday after St. Francis’s Day, changing to cloudy air and rain. Thursday thereafter, moist and windy. Around St. Dionysius’s Day, unsettled with moist winds.

¶ First quarter moon on Sunday after St. Dionysius’s Day at 1 hour and 44 minutes after noon, inclined to cold and moisture with clouds. Tuesday and Wednesday after St. Dionysius’s Day, dark and cold with rain, in many places lasting until Friday.

¶ Full moon in November during which there will be an eclipse of the moon on Sunday after St. Gall’s Day at 8 hours and 27 minutes before noon, cold enough, cloudy with strong winds and rain, in mountains snow. On St. Luke’s Day and the following two days, cloudy air with sharp evil winds, also in many places rain, possibly thunder and lightning heard in some places.

¶ Last quarter moon on Sunday after St. Ursula’s Day at 3 hours and 51 minutes before noon, foggy and cold with blowing wind, thereafter cold rain will come, in mountains snow, lasting until the following Monday. On the evening of St. Simon and St. Jude’s Day, strong wind with noticeable rain, in some places possibly thunder heard around this time.

¶ The intercalated or 13th new moon, bearing no month’s name, on All Saints’ Day at 6 hours and 4 minutes before noon, unsettled weather with strong cold winds, very moist with rain, in many places snow, extending in many places until the following Thursday.

¶ First quarter moon on Tuesday after St. Leonard’s Day at 3 hours and 8 minutes before noon, cold enough with strong winds and rain, in mountains and otherwise snow, extending in many places until St. Martin’s Day. The following Friday, windy and moist.

¶ Full moon of the uneven month on Monday after St. Martin’s Day at 5 hours and 28 minutes after noon, cloudy, cold with moist winds, in many places lasting until the following Wednesday. On the evening and day of St. Elizabeth’s Day, noticeable wind with sudden moisture.

¶ Last quarter moon on Monday after St. Elizabeth’s Day at 8 hours and 56 minutes after noon, cold and dark with moist winds, rain or snow depending on the location, extending until the following Thursday. Saturday after St. Catherine’s Day, cold with dark clouds and windy with rain, in mountains snow, lasting the following two days.

¶ New moon in December on St. Andrew’s Day at 12 hours and 44 minutes after noon, moderately cold, with strong wind and moisture, snow or rain depending on the location. On St. Barbara’s Day and the following Sunday, cold, windy with dark clouds.

¶ First quarter moon on the day of the Conception of the Virgin Mary at 2 hours and 18 minutes after noon, cold and moist according to the season and windy. Saturday and Sunday thereafter, dark clouds with winds and sudden moisture.

¶ Full moon in December on Wednesday after St. Lucy’s Day at 3 hours and 43 minutes before noon, and the following Thursday, a change in the air to great cold, also windy, in some places snow. Saturday thereafter, dark and cold with moisture. On St. Thomas’s Day or near it, moist and windy.

¶ Last quarter moon on Wednesday after St. Thomas’s Day at 4 hours and 29 minutes after noon, this quarter will act according to the season, cold and moist with rough winds. Around St. Stephen’s Day and the day after, cold with dark sky, in some places with moist winds. Wednesday thereafter, unsettled with cold winds and moisture.

¶ New moon in January on Thursday after the day of the Holy Innocents at 6 hours and 2 minutes after noon, frosty, with considerable snow and wind bringing dark clouds.

¶ Here end the future things shown to us mortal people according to the course of the heavens, not that they must come as described here. Since the wise man rules the stars, God the Almighty arranges and governs all things according to His divine will, to whom be praise, honor, and thanksgiving forever. Amen.

From the library of the late D. E. A. W. Krauss.
